[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Not all cells are made equal.
There are certain
types of cells called
stem cells that hold a
big promise in the world
of longevity and anti-aging.
So what are those cells?
And how can we
benefit from them?
>> So I've been getting stem
cells now for about three years.
I first got it for a chronic
injury I had in my knees.
My knees were super sore
and I was building arthritis
from the way I trained.
I trained really heavy,
really hard, very consistently
and it takes a big
toll on my body.
And stem cells are something
that are great for bringing down
inflammation, but
what I learned is
that they're also great for
modulating your immune system.
And I personally have
an autoimmune disease
called IgA nephropathy,
and that started
to affect my
bodybuilding career.
My stress on my body, it was
really just taking a toll on me.
And ever since then, I haven't
had an autoimmune flare up,
I've been much healthier.
My kidney filtration levels
are much more in range now,
and all my health
markers have been
kind of getting much
better over time,
along with all the other
stuff I've been doing.
But I'm sure all the
stem cells have been
a huge contributor of that.
>> All stem cells really do is
they help to repair or restore
function.
So they're the building blocks.
If something is
damaged, they can
help to repair that damaged
tissue back into a normal state.
Now, stem cells also have a
unique ability to self divide,
meaning they can go through
this process called mitosis
where they can divide
and regrow new tissue.
Aging is happening because
of these cellular processes.
What if we can take
these cellular processes
and turn them back
into a normal state?
Meaning like you were
when you were 20.
>> The stem cells are that
regenerative engine that are
constantly repairing.
But as we age, the number
of cells in our body
can be reduced by hundreds
to thousands of fold
so we don't have
the cells there.
And the DNA that was resonant
and pristine at birth
is beginning to
degrade as we age.
So one of the big
technology areas is,
can we replenish your
stem cell population?
>> So if we can have a
treatment that can target all
the hallmarks of aging
in an effective way,
that to me is not only the
most effective in terms of time
saving, but it's also most
likely to be the most impactful.
So in my opinion,
intravenous treatments
of stem cells and
exosomes, which
are derived from
stem cells, target
all those hallmarks of aging and
can slow it down significantly.
>> As long as it's
done properly,
I also don't see too many
potential side effects so I
think the risk is very high,
but these are just opinions.
There's very little
hard scientific evidence
to make any sort of
a objective judgment.
>> It's hard to say that
everyone should try stem cell
therapy because there's plenty
of ways to be healthy very
naturally without drugs,
without spending a lot of money.
But I think there's
specific people who
have specific problems that
it can definitely help with.
Whether it be chronic
injuries, arthritis,
lots of inflammatory
diseases, autoimmune diseases,
I think they can
definitely help.
But I also believe there's
plenty of other methods
to help if that's not
really in your price range
to afford stem cells and
much more you can do.
But it's definitely
something that I
would like to see
the cost come down
and the availability to the
public become a lot more widely
available to the public
so everybody can use it.
>> Like Hippocrates once said,
"Let food be thy medicine,
and let medicine be thy food."
This old adage, it seems,
is still valid to this day.
>> Are you keto
or are you paleo?
Are you pescatarian?
Or are you vegan or plant-based?
Or whatever it is.
You can be what you want, but
you got to eat healthy food.
You got to eat whole foods.
And that means in
general, regardless
of which one of
those things you are,
you got to eat a lot of plants.
You know what I mean?
And you have to have some
high-quality protein.
>> I think diet is one of
the most cost-effective ways
to increase your health.
So I really try and focus
on a whole food diet.
There's a lot of diet
fads that come out,
whether it be carnivore or
keto and all these things,
and I'm sure they all
work in their own way
but at the end of
the day, they're
all restrictions
that stop yourself
from putting certain
things in your body.
And I choose just to put
natural, whole foods in my body.
Whatever's been around
the longest on this earth,
it's probably
there for a reason.
And it's not made by us.
It's made by the planet
Earth for us to eat.
So that's how I typically build
my diet, as natural as possible.
>> If you switch to
mostly plant-based diet,
this can easily add two, three,
five healthy and happy years
to your life.
I'm not religious about
being plant-based.
I occasionally eat
kind of meat or fish,
but I'm also very
focused to consume
as much vegetables as possible.
>> I do have a whole plant
diet, and at the end of the day,
try and minimize my animal
proteins that I bring in.
>> I love being vegetarian.
It can be weird when
you're with a bunch of guys
going to a steakhouse.
What I eat really
makes a difference
in how everything
in my body operates.
>> Literally, I'm
plant-based, raw vegan.
As I get older, the
more raw foods I eat.
>> Mediterranean diet, rather,
is a great diet for people
to look at but today there's
technology where you can see
what your body responds
most to in terms of food.
Some people burn carbs really
well, some people burn fat,
some people burn proteins
so, again, that's
what we do at Fountain Life.
Find out what your individual
body needs and then design
a diet around that ideally.
>> I mean, and I think that's
the thing that doesn't get
enough attention.
You have to learn what it is
for you that fits your wiring.
I don't think there's
one size fits all.
Those type of life hacks
may not extend my lifespan,
but they'll extend the
quality of my life.
>> If there's one thing in
diet, it is eliminating sugar.
Our bodies never evolved for the
amount of sugar that we consume.
Sugar is a neuroinflammatory.
It's a cardiac inflammatory.
It is, unfortunately,
addicting and ravages the body
in a multitude of
different ways.
>> When you get older, food
becomes more like medicine where
you need the nutrients in order
to be able to be your best self.
>> My opinion, and also
the scientific evidence,
shows that plant foods are the
sine qua non of a healthy diet.
And so in our experience,
the sicker the patients are,
the more they have to rely
on 100% plant-based diet.
>> So there's been a lot of
debate as to which diet is best,
but overwhelmingly it seems
that at the moment the best diet
or the best evidence for a diet
would be the Mediterranean diet.
So this is things like lots
of fruits, vegetables, fish,
olive oil, nuts, seeds,
those are the things that
seem to actually
improve our health
and improve the aging process.
>> I eat a 95% plant-based diet.
I eat a little bit of
fish and occasionally will
have a little bit of
cheese or dairy in my diet.
So there's evidence from
both epidemiological,
which is just looking at
different populations,
and also some experimental data
showing that plant-based diet is
what we would call anti-aging.
So it's associated with
slower rates of aging.
So from the epidemiological
perspective,
you can look at these
longest lived populations
around the world which live in
these areas called blue zones,
and they tend to be although
not exclusively plant-based,
mostly plant-based.
>> In terms of whether specific
diet approaches to dietary
components are
good or bad, look,
everybody's trying to
sell you something.
Vegetarians are
generally better off,
but are they better
off because they're not
eating all the gunk
that comes with meat
or are they better off
just because vegetarians
tend to eat fewer calories?
Even a question
as simple as that,
nobody can tell you the answer.
So just basically eat sensibly
and keep the calories lower.
>> The most practical things
that people can do, one,
identify the worst
version of yourself.
And you know who that person is.
In me it was evening Brian.
5:00 PM to 10:00 PM he ate junk
food and way too much every
single night.
And I couldn't stop him.
You have your own
version of evening Brian,
who is that person?
When do they show up?
What are their arguments?
And what can you do to
develop a plan to stop them?
So in my case, I fired
evening Brian and said,
you cannot make
decisions anymore.
But one of the most useful
things you can do in your life
is identify versions
of you that engage
in self-destructive
behavior that you
feel powerless to correct,
try to overpower that.
Name the person,
identify their behaviors,
what their thought patterns
are, what their arguments are,
and then systematically
eliminate them from your life.
>> The purpose of health and
Longevity Tech Fund is to make
the longevity solutions
massively affordable
and available.
This is why we are building up
to 10,000 cafes around the world
where you can get the basic
evolution of your health.
And the cafe will
serve you in a way
how to improve your health
on a systematic way.
And all of this supported
by advanced algorithms
and diagnostics.
>> Heat and cold therapies
have been around for ages,
but now scientists are
discovering the profound effects
that these simple protocols
can have on our health.
>> My name is Wim, Wim Hof.
They call me the iceman because
I broke a lot of records
in the extreme cold.
Cold exposure is the
training of the neglected
cardiovascular system.
It is the best cardiovascular
workout you can imagine.
It is the training of 125,000
kilometers of blood vessels
and millions of
little muscles inside.
It is tackling the
cardiovascular related diseases,
killing millions of people in
Western societies every year.
>> One of my favorite
things that I've been doing
for the last five
years is ice baths.
So I have a cold
plunge in my backyard,
and I like to do these
away from working out
either early in the
morning or on a rest day
because how strong the
anti-inflammatory benefits are,
it can actually
decrease the benefits
of hypertrophy training,
such as lifting weights.
You want the inflammation from
immediately after training,
so you don't want to get
an ice bath after that.
But applying it at
different parts of your day,
it can decrease your cortisol
levels, increase dopamine.
It can help reset
your HRV levels
to help you sleep
better at night.
A lot of benefits that
come from cold therapy,
and a lot of studies
have been on that lately.
>> So at a certain moment, I
came in contact with scientists.
And they tested me, experimented
me, and researched upon me.
And they found out that I was
able to bring down inflammation.
Inflammation causes 50
to 60 million people
to die every year, and probably
a couple of billion people
to have a less quality of
life because of inflammation.
As long as cells are able
to reproduce and to divide,
you live longer.
You can influence that
process very directly
by going into cold
showers every day,
because then you train
the cardiovascular system.
And then the oxygen,
nutrients, the vitamins,
they get everywhere
in all the cells.
A cold shower a day
keeps the doctor away,
that's what I always say.
And now even the
doctors are doing it
because they know
the shit works.
>> I'm a great fan
of cold plunges.
I have started this practice
like four years ago,
and I have observed a
tremendous difference.
So I have suffered from
frequent colds years
ago until I changed to cold
showers, which I do every day.
And this has actually
increased my resilience
against infectious diseases
quite tremendously.
>> Ancient cultures were drawn
to saunas not because they
thought they would live longer,
they were drawn because it made
them feel better.
Similar to today, it could
be 70 degrees outside
and you feel the
warmth of the sun.
It just feels
really, really good.
>> Heat exposure for longevity
is a really interesting area
of research.
There was a lot of data
coming out from Finland where
they were looking at sauna use.
And it seems that
the combination
of sauna use with
exercise seemed
to protect against heart disease
even more than just exercise
alone.
By going into saunas
and subjecting yourself
to quite high temperatures,
we elevate the heart rate,
and we start to sweat
out different salts.
And by doing that, we're
activating heat shock proteins.
So it's hoped that by activating
those types of proteins,
we can make ourselves
more resilient.
Specifically, we can protect
ourselves from heart disease.
>> The good news is you can
activate these powerful heat
shock proteins through
any type of heat activity.
Could be a hot bath, it could
be hot water with lemon,
it can be a sauna.
It can be anything
that generates heat.
>> I also have a sauna, which
sometimes I contrast therapy.
I go back and forth
from sauna to cold tub.
And within that I'll
wear a heart rate monitor
and I'll let my heart
rate get really high
in the sauna, whether
doing sit ups or push ups.
And then I'll immediately
go over to the cold tub
and maybe do some
breathwork like that.
And sometimes I'll
see my heart rate
go from 150 beats per minute
to 50 beats per minute
in the matter of
like two minutes,
and that is a system that
I do that allows my body
to adapt to stress a
lot more effectively.
>> Believe it or not, one of the
most powerful things research
has shown that will transform
your health is a sauna, a sauna,
20 minutes at over 162 degrees.
And the best saunas
are those infrared,
so you have to get one
that goes that high.
But the research on
that is unmistakable.
55% less chance of
having a heart attack.
52% less chance of
having a stroke.
I mean, it goes on and on.
The goal is five times a week.
The study shows if you
do it three times a week
at 20 minutes, at
162 degrees higher,
you get all the benefits
I just described to you,
but to me it's just a habit.
I just do it.
It's fantastic.
>> Sir William Herschel
discovered infrared
in the 1800s.
It was the first
major discovery,
and really brought
infrared to being known.
So much has changed
since that occurred.
Today, infrared is
used in hospitals.
Newborn babies are put in
incubators with infrared lamps
to emulate the mother's womb.
Dr. Harry Whalen
worked with NASA.
What we realized is
if you had a wound,
it doesn't heal the same in
space as it does on Earth.
So he used LEDs to
increase cellular growth
to improve wound healing.
This was then later
used by the US military,
in particular Navy SEALs.
>> Extreme heat exposure is
also really important to me.
Once I learned that when you
do saunas five to seven times
a week, you're reducing all
cause mortality up to 50%,
I'm not just doing
it myself, I'm like,
I'm asking my mom
to do it every day.
>> We have numerous studies
showing the benefit of combining
both light and heat to
make the brain healthier.
One of the ways the
brain becomes healthier
as a result of combining
infrared light and heat
is by increasing the
blood flow to the brain
and helping to
recharge the brain
cells so that the brain can
think clearer and respond
faster.
Some of the
conditions at infrared
has been shown to
improve are depression,
Alzheimer's and dementia.
There is recently a
study with depression
that's extremely impressive
because with only one
treatment of infrared, people
reduced their depression
symptoms for over six weeks.
>> A sauna practice affects
the core body temperature.
Viruses cannot live in a altered
feverish, poor body temperature.
>> There are numerous studies,
some I will highlight,
are the BUS study.
That stands for
blood, urine, sweat.
This study showed the difference
of heavy metals being removed
from the body with infrared
treatment through sweat,
versus blood and urine.
For example, one
of the results was
when people tested for mercury,
15% had no levels of mercury.
But then when they tested their
sweat, it was 100% had mercury.
>> Infrared saunas increased the
promotion of white blood cells,
which help to build
your immunity.
Infrared saunas increase
sweat, which helps
you get rid of the toxins.
As your body's sweating, it's
fighting to cool itself down.
That increases
their circulation,
which also helps to
push the immune cells
throughout your body, getting
them to where they need to be.
And, finally, using
an infrared sauna.
Relaxation, it's everything.
Getting ourselves out
of this chronic stress,
this fight or flight
mentality truly
is one of the best factors to
increasing our immune system
and helping to fight disease.
>> Go into the sauna.
It's amazing.
It works.
I love the sauna.
>> So what if the breakthroughs
in longevity do not become
a reality as quickly as
we would like them to?
If we're running out of
time, is there a plan B?
>> Personally, I also
believe in cryonics.
If someone dies,
we can cryonically
suspend them and
keep them frozen,
if you will, for maybe 50 years,
until we can reanimate them.
So I think this
is a possibility.
This was also impossible
before, until it
was discovered with in
vitro fertilization, which
is freezing embryos or
human eggs or human sperm.
So we know that
this is possible.
And there are 8 million humans
who have been already frozen
when they were embryos.
>> Back in the 1970s, we
really were freezing people.
We didn't have any
technology that would
allow us to do anything else.
And as most people know,
when you freeze tissue,
you get crystallization, you
get dehydration of the cells,
a lot of different problems.
Over the last 47 years,
we've come a long way
in what we're able to do.
The biggest breakthrough
was about 15 years ago
when we learned how
to vitrify tissue.
Vitrification is a
physics term which
refers to taking a liquid
below the ice point
and not having it
crystallize, but have it
turn into a glass-like state.
Obviously, there's
a lot less damage.
Once we were able to do that,
it was huge leaps forward,
but we still had the
problem of rewarming.
Those of us who
are more optimistic
think it will be
50 years or less,
and those who are
more pessimistic
put it at about 100 years.
With nanotechnology, the way
it's envisioned for revival
is it would do very much
the same kind of thing.
But instead of trillions
of biological cells,
you would have these tiny
little nanorobots which
are computer controlled,
would be in the cells
and they would do
the same thing.
They would look at a cell
wall that's been damaged,
tear it down into its
constituent atoms,
and then rebuild the wall so
that it functions properly.
Memory is cryopreserved.
We don't have our memories,
it's not going to be us.
And so that's integral.
And we feel very confident
that memory and identity
are being retained.
I mean, when you stop
and think about it,
not a single human
being has ever survived
being alive on this Earth.
[LAUGHS] There are
about 167 people
who are trying to make that
not be true for them right now.
Very soon, within
50 to 100 years,
people will suddenly
realize that death
was a thing of the past.
>> Look, if you're on the
Titanic and someone throws you
a life vest, even if you're not
sure whether the life vest will
do anything later, will you
jump for it or won't you?
>> I think anybody who doesn't
do that and they can afford it
is crazy.
That's something that
is the last resort.
But I sure hope I have
the money to afford it
if all of a sudden
I get diagnosed
with some life
threatening disease,
that I'm ready to be
frozen so that maybe 200
years from now somebody can
cure me and bring me back.
I think that's better
than not trying.
>> I love coming in here.
It is a place of hope.
I'm happy to know that my family
members have a chance, as I hope
I will, in seeing the future.
>> After creating the XPRIZE
Foundation and spearheading
the development of the
private space industry sector,
Peter Diamandis took on a new
challenge, stopping aging.
His new longevity XPRIZE
promises to pay $100 million
to the team of
scientists that is
able to come up with
solutions to halt aging
within the next few years.
>> When I was in medical school,
I remember seeing a documentary
on long lived sea life.
That certain species of
whales, bowhead whales,
could live 200 years
and Greenland sharks
could live four or 500 years.
And I remember thinking,
if they can live that long,
why can't we?
And back then, the answer
that came to me was it's
either going to be a software
problem or a hardware problem,
and we're going to be
able to solve that.
And so I became enamored
over the last decade
with building businesses
that could extend
the healthy human lifespan.
I think it's one of
the biggest business
opportunities on the planet
and the greatest gift
you can give anybody.
>> Age reversal XPRIZE is a
global technological competition
that we want to run for develop
in solution to reverse aging.
So how are you going to do it?
It's going to be 200, 300, 400
teams all around the world.
They should use their own
intervention technology or piece
of science to reverse aging, in
particular statistical sample
of population.
The XPRIZE Foundation puts up
large scale global competitions,
and we ask the
world's entrepreneurs
to solve a problem that
has not been solved.
And these competitions have a
very clear, objective outcome.
And they say, I don't care
where you went to school,
what you've ever done.
If you do this, you win.
Our first XPRIZE was
for private spaceflight.
It was a $10 million
prize for the team that
could build a private
spaceship, carry three adults up
100 kilometers, land again and
do it again within two weeks.
And we're offering
$101 million purse
for the team that can
reverse the ravages of aging.
Can you, in fact,
reverse by 20 years?
Functionally, skin, immune,
muscle and cognition.
And for me, it's about
changing the mindset of people
from not, wow, this is crazy.
Can it be done?
To, oh my god, when is
it going to be done?
>> Longevity is a new
field for science,
technology and medicine.
There are many
questions out there
and several misconceptions
about the space.
>> So when you start to talk to
somebody about extending human
lifespan, one of the first
places they go to is what about
overpopulation?
But there's a couple of
really relieving data points
that need to be
discussed in that.
The first one is
that all technology
is working in parallel.
It's not that all scientists
are working on extending aging.
Some people are working
on global climate change,
some people are working on how
to feed a multitude of people.
Some people are
working on space travel
and how to start
mining asteroids.
But there is another data
point that's really important,
and that is as lifespan
extends, birth rates go down.
And that's everywhere
in the world.
>> Overpopulation is
not a problem anymore.
I mean, this was a problem
that we saw like 20 years ago,
but today we know the growth
rate of the population
is declining.
>> If we stop aging,
actually, we will save money
because people will not go
to hospital for expensive
treatments when they are dying
because people will not be
dying.
So, actually, we
will have more money.
The governments
will have more money
if people are young, if people
don't age, if people don't need
expensive medical treatments,
if there is no retirement
funds because people will
be young and able to work
indefinitely if they want
in an economy of abundance.
>> And, indeed, a recent poll
suggests that 68% of Americans
would support the treatment
of aging if the therapies were
safe, effective, affordable,
and available to all.